From Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts - and Philharmonic Hall,
home of the world's greatest musical
events — another program of NEW YORK
PHILHARMONIC YOUNG PEOPLE'S CONCERTS
under the musical direction of Leonard
Bernstein.
SKIPPED
This award-winning series is brought to by A.T. and T. and the Bell System Associated Companies.
BERNSTEIN ENTERS
(LIVE - ON CUE)
(And) now here is Leonard Bernstein.
My dear young friends:	I am happy and
proud to welcome you to our tenth season
of Young People's Concerts. Imagine, it's
been a whole decade we've been playing
and talking about music for you. I
don't know how much you've actually
learned, but I like to think we must be
doing something right, because -- well
because it's our tenth season. And to add
to the festivities, this is also the
first season in which all our programs
will be seen on television in color.
That's why I've got this wildly
colorful tie on. Which brings us to
our subject: what is a mode? Well, for one
thing, modes have nothing to do
with neckties, or dresses, or even with
fashions of a musical kind. Modes are
simply scales — though not perhaps those
scales you are forced to practice on your piano.
They are rather special scales ;*and I
wouldn't have dreamed of bothering you
with them, except for an incident that
happened a few months ago. My 14-year old
daughter Jamie happened to ask me one
day why a certain Beatles song had such
funny harmony; she couldn't seem to find
the right chords for it on her guitar.
I began to explain to her that the song
was modal — that is, based on what
is called a mode: I went on to show
her the chords that come from it--
and she got so excited she wanted to
know more and more about it, until finally
she saids "Why not tell all this on
a Young People's Program? Nobody ever heard
of modes!" Well, I thought, Jamie is just a
natural music-lover with the usual
weekly piano lesson, and if she finds
this material fascinating, why shouldn't
you? So here goes, and you can blame it
all on Jamie. O.K. We already know that a
mode is a scale.* But what, first of all, is
a scale? I'm sure you know; but maybe
you've never tried to put it into words.
A scale is simply a way of dividing
up the distance between any note and the
same note repeated an octave higher
The most famous and often used division
of this octave in our Western
music
is what we call the major scale. I guess
you all know that one. And the other
famous one is the minor scale. I guess
you know that too. Now what's the
difference between the major and the
minor? Many people think the only
difference is that the major scales are
happy-sounding, and the minor ones are sad. Well,
that's sometimes true, but not always. The
real difference is in the arrangement of
the intervals — you remember how deeply we
dug into intervals last season? And you
remember we found that the smallest
interval - that is, the shortest distance from one
note to its nearest neighbor—is called a
half-tone (we called it a "minor second" last year, but never mind that now.) So from C to C# is a step
of a half-tone. And from C# to D is
again a half-tone.
But from C straight to D is a
whole tone — 2 halves make a whole.
Get it? Fine. Now this entire C-major
scale is just a series of whole
tones and half-tones arranged in a
special order:* C to D, a whole tone; D to E again a whole tone;
E to F, a half-tone (since we've skipped nothing); then 3 whole
tones: F to G, G to A, A to B; and finally B to C, a half-tone.
That's the formula for any major scale, whether it begins on C or on Eb or on Q-sharp; 2 whole tones, a half-tone, 3 whole tones, and a half-tone.*
Now the minor scale is almost the same
arrangement of intervals: the main
difference being in the third note of
the scale which in the minor is a half
-tone lower so that the minor scale
sounds like this
And it doesn't matter whether you start
on C or on Eb or Q sharp:
OR (WITHOUT CUT) - SKIPPED
Again, it doesn't matter what note you
start with:
you can always get a (major or) minor
scale by following the proper
arrangement of intervals that
SKIPPED
* a whole-tone, a half-tone, 4 whole-tones,
and a half-tone. But let's not burden
CUT	ourselves with any more formulas: *
the important thing is that those two
kinds of scales, major and minor, are
modes.
But they are only two modes out of a
much larger number of possible ones.
Now before I tell you anything else
about modes, we are going to play you a
short but marvelous piece, by the great
French composer Debussy, which is
completely based on modes that are
neither major nor minor. This brilliant
piece, which is called Festivals, or, in
French, Fetes, uses all kinds of modes
which, of course, you won't know about yet;
you'll just be hearing beautiful sounds
that will seem a bit strange and ear-
tickling. But we're goirg; to play it
again later, toward the end of this program,
and I'm sure that by then you'll be able
to recognize all the peculiar things that are
going on. So, for the moment, just
imagine a splendid
night-time celebration, with many-colored
lights and lanterns everywhere,
gorgeous fireworks in the sky, and
everyone dancing in costumes of
long ago. Suddenly, in the middle of
the piece, the music breaks off, and
a procession is heard in the far
distance. This march-like music gets
nearer and nearer, and when it
arrives in all its glory, the dance-music
and the march music are heard together
in an excitirg blend of tumultuous
sounds. Finally
it grows late, the crowds thin-out--as
does the music--and it all ends in a
whisper, with an echo or two of the
night's festivities hanging in the silent air.
Here is Debussy's Fetes.
How about that for an exciting piece?
It's positively goose-fleshy. And a
lot of the excitement comes from
the fact that it uses those strange
scales, or modes.
For instance, right at the
beginning, the driving rhythm
SKIPPED
of those bright, shining open fifths way up high
tell us that this music is neither major nor minor. Those empty fifths
contain in them neither the 3rd note of the major scale ,
which would make them into major chords , nor the 3rd note of the minor scale , which would make them minor chords . They're just empty, neutral.
Now, underneath them, appears that first swirling dance-
tune which sounds at first like
the usual minor mode. In fact,
the first 5 notes are exactly the
first five notes of the minor scale but
then comes the twist. Those notes don't
belong to any minor scale we know.
SKIPPED
That  is where it gets peculiar.
But Debussy's tune is shaped just like
a scale, isn't it? .
So what scale is it? Answer: It's the
scale of the Dorian mode. Now don't let
that throw you: keep calm, sit back and
let's quietly find out just what this
Dorian mode is, and why it sounds so
special. The word Dorian obviously comes
from the Greek: and in fact the Dorian mode, as well as
the others we're about to
discover, does come originally
from the music of ancient Greece. We don't
know too much about that old Greek music:
what we do know is that the Greek modes
eventually made their way to Rome, and
were taken up by the Roman Catholic
Church during the middle ages in a
somewhat different form. But the church
kept the old Greek names for the modes:
Dorian, Phrygian, Lydian, Mixolydian,
Aeolian, Locrian, and Ionian. There's
a mouthful for you. But they're
much easier to understand than their
names are to pronounce. They are
still used today in certain Catholic churches
all over the world, in those beautiful
chants called plain-song. Here is a tiny
example of plain-song, in the Dorian mode:
That is music in the Dorian
mode, u exactly the same scale, the
same arrangement of intervals, as Debussy used
in his Fetes. But what is the scale? Ah,
that's easy. To find the Dorian mode on
your piano, all you have to do is to start
on the note D.
and play only white notes all the way up to the next D.
and you've got it. Isn't that simple? And that's true
of all the other Church modes as well --
they're all to be found by
starting on a given white note and
making a scale u white notes only.
Isn't that lucky? And we're luckier
still with the Dorian mode, because it
starts on D, and D is the first letter of
the word Dorian! So you have no excuse
for forgetting how to find this mode:
Dorian,
Capital letter D, the note D, white notes all the way
up--and there it is.
Now here's another piece in the Dorian
mode -- I wonder if you know it:
Along comes Mary, in the ancient and
honorable Dorian mode -- the same mode we
just heard in Debussy and in the plain-
chant. Who'd have thunk it? What is
that old Greek mode doing in today's pop
music? Well, I'll tell you. From about the
time of Bach until the beginning of our
own century -- roughly 200 years — our
western music has been based almost
exclusively on only two modes -- the major
and the minor. I can't go into the why's
and wherefore's now, but it's true.
And since most of the music we hear in
concerts today was written during that
200 year period, we get to think that
major and minor modes are all there are.
But the history of music is much longer
than a mere 200 years. There was a
lot of music sung and played before Bach,
u all kinds of other modes. And in
the music of our own century, when
composers have gotten tired of being
stuck with major and minor modes all the time,
there has been a big revival of those
old pre-Bach modes. That's why Debussy
used them so much, and other modern
composers like Hindemith and Stravinsky,
and almost all the young song writers of
today's exciting pop music.
The modes have provided them with a fresh
sound, a relief from that old, overused
major and minor.
If that swinging opening of
Along Comes Mary had been written in the
usual, every-day minor mode, it would sound
like this.
Sort of square, isn't it? Ordinary. But
this -- this has a kick in it, and the kick
is Dorian. You can see that this Dorian
mode is almost like our ordinary minor
mode, but not quite. And that not quite
makes a big difference; and that
difference gives the music a certain
ancient, primitive, almost oriental feeling.
That's why the plain-chant we heard
before is so stirring, so ancient as to
seem timeless. And that's why the tune
in Debussy's Fetes seems so exotic, and
of another age. And that's why Along
Comes Mary sounds so primitive, and earthy.
Now listen to this
opening section of Sibelius' Sixth
Symphony, which is also in the Dorian
mode, and see if you feel again that
same timeless, brooding, ancient, far-off
quality, this time coming from the
remote, lonely forests of Finland:
Do you see what I mean by the special
feeling of the Dorian mode?
Let's get technical for a
minute, and find out just what it is that
gives us this feeling. As we know, this
Dorian mode is practically like our
usual minor mode — with one very big
differences the 7th
note of the scale
That 7th note is called the "leading tone," because it
is supposed to lead us back to the keynote, or tonic
which is D. And that leading tone leads
us back to the tonic by the smallest interval possible, a half-tone.
But in the Dorian mode,
there's a full whole-
tone between the leading-tone and the tonic.
Do you feel how strange and modal that is?
The minute we hear that
we feel behind it the weight of many
centuries, of a different, older, more
Eastern culture. Bach never wrote an Amen
like that, and neither did Beethoven or
Brahms. But in our own century it gets
written all the time.
For example, this;
There's no Amen, of
course; but musically it's the
same idea.
SKIPPED
And so is this:
STRINGS (2 bars) & :ELEANOR RIGBY (:20)
Well, that's an awful
lot about the Dorian mode - which, you will
never forget as long as you live, starts
on D. Dorian - D. Now let's get on to the next
one - which starts on E -
the Phrygian mode. Again,
this is terribly easy to find on the
piano:	you start on E, again play
only white notes up to the next E.
and there's your Phrygian mode.
Now this Phrygian mode is very much like
the Dorian:	it is a minor mode
and it has that lowered 7th leading
tone
But it also has something
else very unusual:	it is the only mode
that begins with a step of a half-tone--
that is, from the first note, E, to the
second, F, is a mere half-step.
And that gives the mode a specially sad
quality which can be heard in so much
Spanish and Hebrew and gypsy music.
For instance, you all know the beginning
of Liszt's 2nd Hungarian
Rhapsody -- don't you?
Do you hear that typical sad, gypsy sound?
That's the Phrygian mode for you. It's a
very oriental-sounding one, and has
been much used by Western composers
during that famous 200-year
period when they
wanted to make Oriental effects. Like
this well-known spot in
the 3rd movement of Rimsky-Korsakov's Scheherezade - which, as
you know, is madly Oriental:
That's as Oriental as you can get.
And it's pure Phrygian
But the real
surprise is to find that even old
German Brahms has used
this mode — very unusual for him -- in
the slow movement of his 4th Symphony.
I'm sure you've all heard this solemn
and majestic phrase:
ORK:	Brahms 4th - 1st 4 bars (:20)
That's the sound of the Phrygian mode.
All right, up we
climb to the next mode,
called the Lydian. This one, as you
might guess, begins on F, and like the
others, uses only white notes all the
way up the octave
That's the Lydian mode. Now what makes
this one different from the other two
modes we've already talked about? Two
things: first, that it is a major mode
the first one we've
met so far; and second, — well let's see if
you can tell me. I'm going to play you our
normal scale of F major, and now, the
Lydian scale starting on F.
Now there's one very peculiar note in that
mode -- the only note that's different from
the usual F-major scale. And I want you
to tell me which note is the peculiar
one, by clapping the second
you hear it. Is that a deal? O.K.
First, here's the normal F-major scale.
Now the Lydian scale;
and remember, you're going to clap when you
hear the "wrong" note.
Right:	it's that 4th note of the
scale, which is a half tone higher than
normal
And it
gives this mode a very funny quality, almost comical,
as if a wrong note were
being played on purpose. And many
20th century composers have taken
advantage of this Lydian mode to get
comic effects. For instance, Prokofieff, in his
music for the comedy-film "Lieutenant
Kije,"
uses this mode, with its raised 4th,
in the very opening, as a piccolo solo: Could you
detect that "wrong note"? If this were
written in the straight major scale, it
would sound like this:
But no:	Prokofieff adds his
comic touch by u that Lydian raised
4th note:
SKIPPED
And our own American composer, Aaron Copland, has used the same device in his music for a comic scene in the film "Of Mice and Men."
There's that funny note again (PLAY F#).
But I don't want you to think
that the Lydian mode is only
comical. On the contrary, it can be a
very serious mode indeed. In fact,
Beethoven wrote a whole long very serious
movement of a string quartet in this
mode. And, of course, it's still used
in Roman Catholic plain-chant.
And again, Sibelius --always a great
mode-lover -- was constantly u the
Lydian mode, as in this passage from his
4th symphony:
ORK: Sibelius - 4th Symph., 2nd mov't, beginning to dbt. 1 before (A). (:13)
Do you hear that Lydian note? Only this time
it's not a funny note, but a strange
piercing note that seems to come from a
far-away place. And that's only natural:
These modes do come from far-away —
the Middle-East, and Eastern
European countries like Greece, Bulgaria,
Finland, Russia, and Poland. In fact, Poland is
one of the main breeding-grounds for
this Lydian mode. You constantly hear it
in the works of Chopin, Poland's greatest composer,
especially when he was
writing Polish nationalistic dance pieces, like
Polonaises and Mazurkas. Here's a bit
from one of his best-known Mazurkas; and
see if you can hear that Lydian sound:
It's an odd sound, isn't it? So fresh and
sharp, like the taste of lemon-juice. And
it's a very Polish sound. In fact, when
the Russian composer Mussorgsky - now
follow this - was writing the
3rd act of
his great opera Boris Godunov -- an act which
takes place in Poland -- he used this same
Lydian mode for his Polonaise,
which means "Polish dance." We're going
to play it for you now -- and listen for
that tangy Lydian sound."
So far we have had a good look at
three important modes - the Dorian, the
Phrygian and the Lydian — those white-note
scales that start on D, E, & F,
respectively. Now let's have a quick look
at the remaining ones -- starting with the
mode that begins on G and rises up
through the octave on the white notes
This one is called (now don't panic!) —
the Mixolydian mode; and
despite its tongue-twisting name, it's
one of the most appealing and popular
modes of all. Again, like its neighbor, the
Lydian, it's a major mode, as you can hear
and, like the Lydian it has one
peculiar note in it, and only one - only a different one this time.
See if you can
tell which it is. Here is a normal G-major
scale. Now here is the Mixolydian scale;
and I dare you to clap
when you hear the one odd note.
Right: it's the 7th tone, the leading tone,
which is half a tone lower than
normal
This is the only major mode that has
a lowered leadirg tone;
and believe it or not, most of the
jazz and Afro-Cuban music and
rock-n-roll tunes we hear owe their
existence to this old Mixolydian
mode.
Do you hear how that lowered 7th tone
makes a jazz sound?
Of course the examples I
could give you are endless — but just to
take a recent smash hit:
Mixolydian.
Or do you remember a terrific,
barbaric song a few years
ago, by The Kinks? --
Pure Mixolydian.
Or, take that charming Beatles tune, "Norwegian
Wood" --
You hear that lowered 7th note?
That makes it Mixolydian.
They're all
Mixolydian. Now again, I don't want to
give you the idea that this mode
produces only jazz. It's
still to be heard in churches as well as
in discotheques. And, in fact, our old
friend Debussy, when he wanted to suggest
a Cathedral risirg out of the sea (in
his piano piece, The Sunken Cathedral) used this same
Mixolydian mode.
Isn't that an impressive sound.
And years ago, when I was
writing my first ballet "Fancy Free," I
too used this mode for one
of the dances: and since it was a Cuban-style
dance called a danzon. I naturally
used this Mixolydian mode from beginning to end;
so it ought to make a good example. Here
it is, and I hope you like it.
In the few minutes that remain
to us, I would like to pay my brief
respects to the three modes we still
haven't discussed. We can do this very
quickly, as you will see, because the
first one, known as the Aeolian mode --
which luckily starts on A, making it easy
to remember -- is almost like our normal
minor scale;
in fact, it is sometimes referred to as the
"natural minor" mode. Its one special
feature is, again, that lowered leading-tone
which makes it so similar to the Dorian
and Phrygian modes that we don't even have
to discuss it. Then, the next
mode, starting on B, is known as the
Locrian and this we can really
skip, because there is almost no music
written in it. The Locrian mode is
strangely unsatisfying,
mainly because the
tonic chord you get from it is terribly
unsettled and inconclusive --see what I mean? So hello and
goodbye to the Locrian mode. Now we
have been through all the white-note
modes, starting on D, E, F, G, A, & B. And at
last we come to C
the starting note of our final and most triumphant mode,
called the Ionian. Listen carefully now:
here is C, and up we go, white notes only,
to the next C
-- and what have we got? Surprise:	The C-
major scale! The good old, tried and true
C-major of Bach, Beethoven, Brahms, and company.
This major mode, once known as the
Ionian, has simply survived the evolutionary process better than
all its neighbors
and emerged in glory as king of
all Western music for 200 years.
And so, to celebrate the king of all the modes, the major scale,
SKIPPED
we are going to play the final minute - the Coda - of the greatest movement to C-major ever built -- Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. Here, at last, you won't have to worry about raised 4ths and lowered leading-tones; you can temporarily say goodbye to the Beatles, the Kinks, and even Debussy, and just drink up the majesty and strength of this tremendous C-major festival by-Beethoven."
Well, by now you've heard enough about modes, and
heard enough examples of them, so that I
think you're ready to hear Debussy's "Festivals"
again, and this time really connect with
it. But just to refresh your memory: do you
recall that opening dancy tune in the
Dorian mode?
Then, a little later on,
Debussy switches to the Lydian mode --
do you remember? The one with the raised
4th note, the Polish one? That's Lydian.
Then, a few seconds later, he's suddenly in
the Mixolydian mode -- remember?
The one with the lowered leading tone, the jazzy one?
So, in the first half-minute of
the piece, Debussy has already used three
different modes,
Dorian, Lydian, and
Mixolydian. Then, in that famous middle
section, when the distant procession
begins, we hear it again in the Dorian:
and then it quickly switches to Mixolydian:
And so it goes, one mode after the other;
including a few I haven't told you about.
But there is one thrilling place in this
piece you should be prepared for:
that wonderful moment when the procession-
music and the dance music come
together. The trick is, of course, that
they're both in the Dorian mode, and so they
make perfect mates. Here is the dance
-music:
And here is the march-music:
And here are the two musics together:
Isn't that a staggering sound? Now, listen
to the entire piece; and I hope you
enjoy it at least twice as much as
the first time you heard it.
SKIPPED
You ought to, you know, since you are now Masters of the Modes.
The New York Philharmonic Young People's Concerts are brought to you by AT & T and the Bell System Associated Companies, who thank you for being with us tonight. Films of many of the concerts in this series are available without charge to schools and other groups. For information, call your local Bell Telephone business office.